Compaction persistence rfc (#695)
slatedb/slatedb: rfcs/0012-compaction-state-persistence.md

| **75% complete** | Restart (0% preserved) | Resume from 75% (75% preserved) | 75% | 242 operations |
| **90% complete** | Restart (0% preserved) | Resume from 90% (90% preserved) | 90% | 290 operations |

**Average work preservation**: **50%** across all failure scenarios

#### **Scaling Analysis**

| Compaction Size | SSTs | Base Ops | +Persistence | Additional Cost | % Overhead |
|-----------------|------|----------|--------------|----------------|------------|
| **10GB** (40 SSTs) | 40 | 82 | 122 | $0.000020 | +49% |
| **40GB** (160 SSTs) | 160 | 322 | 482 | $0.000080 | +50% |  
| **100GB** (400 SSTs) | 400 | 802 | 1,202 | $0.000200 | +50% |
| **1TB** (4,000 SSTs) | 4,000 | 8,002 | 12,002 | $0.002000 | +50% |

**Key observations:**
- **Operations increase by ~50%**, but absolute costs remain minimal
- **Cost scales linearly** with compaction size (~$0.000002/GB)
- **Percentage overhead is consistent** at ~50% across all sizes  
- **Total costs are negligible** compared to storage and compute costs

## Future Extensions

### **Distributed Compaction**
- Persistent state provides foundation for multi-compactor coordination and work distribution.

> - Add time boundary based persistence of SSTs to the compaction state in the object_store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define a minimum time boundary between compaction file updates to prevent excessive writes to the file (see https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695#discussion_r2229977189)
```

- **Customer impact** from extended recovery times during outages
- **Resource waste** from repeated processing of the same data

## Proposal

### **Core Strategy: Iterator-Based Persistence**

Rather than complex chunking mechanisms, we leverage SlateDB's existing iterator architecture which provides natural persistence boundaries at **SST completion points**. This approach:

- **Builds on existing infrastructure**: Enhances current `execute_compaction` method
- **Uses natural boundaries**: SST completions provide ~256MB recovery granularity  
- **Minimizes overhead**: Persistence aligns with existing I/O patterns
- **Scales cost-effectively**: Higher persistence frequency for larger, more valuable compactions

#### Steps

1. `Compaction` initialises the `CompactionScheduler` and `CompactionEventHandler` during startup [No change required]
2.  The `CompactionEventHandler` refreshes the compaction state by merging it with the `current manifest`[Need to refresh and merge with the persisted compaction state]
3. `CompactionEventHandler` communicates this compaction state to the `CompactionScheduler` which decides and groups L0 SSTs and SRs to be compacted together.

> [This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]

Author: What I meant was that the destination SR having partially persisted SSTs would need to be fetched and restarted as a CompactionJob when the next compaction cycle starts.

Hope this provides the clarification. Should I update the line to be more clearer?

> [This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]

Reviewer: This wouldn't involve the compaction scheduler, though, would it? The CompactionJob has already been created and started, which is downstream of the scheduler.

> [This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]

Reviewer: > the CompactionJob would cease to exist

I thought we were going to persist this to the .compactor file. So when a new compactor process comes up, it doesn't need to submit a request to the compaction job. It takes the existing CompactorJob from the .compactor file and gives it to the executor to resume.

> [This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]

Author: > (by creating a new compaction job based on the old one, or something?).

This is what I meant by cease to exist and create another jobAttempt but with the existing output SSTs. It would be fetching the `active_compactions` from the persisted latest .compactor file. The flow would be as follows:
1. Compactor starts/wakes up to trigger the CompactionEventHandler to poll the current manifest from the object store and refresh the local manifest state.
2. CompactorEventHandler then polls the CompactionState from the object store and refresh the local CompactionState.
3. CompactionEventHandler then updates the local db State by merging the local manifest and the local CompactionState.This step ensures that the local db State is consistent and doesn't diverge on updates from other concurrently running task.Merging with local state also reduces the risk of an output SST failing to be persisted by a task, as it could also be persisted when another task is persisting to the object store.
4. CompactorEventHandler then provides this local Db State to the `CompactionScheduler`. The `ConflictChecker` ensures that same sourceIDs don't override each other(this would helpful when reassigning partially completed Compactions after a process restart/crash).Once all the validations are done, the scheduler would determine new destination SRs and group the input L0 SSTs and SRs. In case of active destination SRs, the scheduler would it to the list of compactions in case of no Conflicts.
5. If the number of concurrent running CompactionJobs are less than the threshold, the CompactionExecutor creates a fresh CompactionJob for fresh compactions and a new CompactionJob based on the older compactionJob for the partially completed ones.
6. The CompactionJob task updates the .compactor files after creation of a new output SST
7. Once the CompactionJob is complete it will update the manifest file.

> [This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]

Reviewer: Yea, I think step (4) is where you and I diverge. I think resuming partial compactions should happen before the scheduler is called. I'm thinking it would be its own ticker in `run_async_task` just before `manifest_poll_ticker.tick`. Since we use `biased;` this will guarantee that we always resume before partial compactions before we get to the manifest poll ticker, which calls `maybe_schedule_compactions`. This seems much cleaner to me and allows us to continue using the new ticker to pick up manual requests on a periodic basis as well.

> [This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]

Reviewer 2: Yeah I see it pretty much the same way @criccomini describes. The scheduler shouldn't even really know whether or not a job is a restarted job or not. Its just this (typically stateless) oracle that sees the set of currently running compactions and the current lsm tree and returns new compactions that should run.

4. A `CompactionExecutor` executes these grouped SSTs by spawning tasks that execute the `compactionJob`.[No change required]

> 5. The task loads all the iterators in a `MergeIterator` struct and runs compactions on it. It discards older expired versions and continues to write to a SST block. Once the SST block reaches it's threshold size, the block is written to the active destination SR. Periodically the task also provides stats on task progress[Need persist the new block to the compaction state in object store]

Reviewer: > I have interchangeably used block to represent these SST

Ah, gotcha. Yes, this is quite confusing because we only use "block" to describe the 4KiB (default) blocks inside an SST. Mind changing the wording?

> There are 2 levels of persistence:
> 
> 1. When an output SST is written to a destination SR, we persist the compaction state.
> 2. When all the output SSTs are written to a destination SR, we first persist the compaction state and once the `CompactionJob` completes successfully we persist the manifest so that the compacted SRs are visible to the clients.

Awesome, this lines up with my thinking as well.

> 5. The task loads all the iterators in a `MergeIterator` struct and runs compactions on it. It discards older expired versions and continues to write to a SST block. Once the SST block reaches it's threshold size, the block is written to the active destination SR. Periodically the task also provides stats on task progress[Need persist the new block to the compaction state in object store]

Author: Updated the wordings.

6. When a task completes compaction execution, the task returns the {destinationId, outputSSTs} to the `CompactionEventHandler`
7. `CompactionEventHandler` is responsible to update in-memory compaction state, cleanup the job task, write logs and update manifest[Need to update the compaction persistence state]
8. GC clears the orphaned states and SSTs during it's run.

### **Key Design Decisions**

#### **1. Persistence Boundaries**

> **Decision**: Persist state at the critical boundary:

Reviewer: Let's begin with the simple case: update the state on each SST write. We can have a follow-on PR to add throttling.

> **Decision**: Persist state at the critical boundary:

Author: > Mind capturing this in the rfc?

Yes, I will add it in the Future Plans section.

- **Output SST Completion**: Every ~256MB of written data (always persisted)

**Rationale**: Output SST completions provide the best recovery value per persistence operation. Each represents significant completed work that we don't want to lose.

#### **2. Enhanced Job Model**  
**Decision**: Change from 1:1 to 1:N relationship between Compaction and CompactionJob.

**Rationale**: Enables retry logic, progress tracking, and recovery without breaking existing compaction scheduling logic.

#### **3. State Management Pattern**
**Decision**: Mirror the existing `ManifestStore` pattern with `CompactorStore`.

> **Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

Author: Make sense. Are we good here to mark this as resolved? I think this should be captured in RFC around why do we plan to deprecate `compactor_epoch` in manfest

> **Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

Reviewer: Hmm.. thought about this a bit more, and revisited:

https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0002-compaction.md

I think we need compactor epoch to prevent multiple (split brain) compactors from updating the manifest, right? The compactor needs to update the manifest when it finishes an SR:

https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0002-compaction.md#executing-a-compaction

Without the compactor epoch, there's a potential for split brain compactors to stomp or add incorrect (abandoned/invalid) SRs.

> **Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

Author: I built the timeline diagram for the split brain scenario you described. Is this what you were trying to describe?

```
                           Compactor Init          CompactionState CAS Update      Manifest Merge Update
                                |                           |                            |
                                |                           |                            |
                                |                           |                            |
                                |                           |                            |
                                |                           |                            |
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
T = 0                     Compactor A
                         (compactor_epoch = 0)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
T = 1                                               Compactor A (by a CompactionJob)
                                                      (compactor_epoch = 0)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
T = 2                     Compactor B
                         (copies compactionState last persisted by Compactor A,
                          compactor_epoch = 1)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
All CompactionJobs associated with Compactor A completed else compactor A would shutdown during CompactionState update by a CompactionJob
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
T = 3                                                                                  Compactor A (fenced compactor, 
                                                                                       compactor_epoch = 0, writer_epoch = 1)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
T = 4                                               Compactor B (by a CompactionJob)
                                                      (compactor_epoch = 1)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
T = 5                                                                                  Compactor B
                                                                                       (compactor_epoch = 1, writer_epoch = 1)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
```

Timeline diagram observations:-

1. Compactor B inherits all the compacted SR state from Compaction A since Compactor A has not persisted CompactionState after Compactor B was initiated. So,  compactionState A is a superset of compactionState B
2. When Compactor A updates manifest by merging remote Manifest with it's compactionState, based on Point (1), it would not diverge or corrupt the manifest.

> **Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

Reviewer: @sujeetsawala thanks for writing this up. As you've observed, the question seems to be: if we don't have a compactor_epoch in the manifest, what do we do when the manifest is updated by the compactors out of order?

I started to write down a protocol that would allow us to keep `compactor_epoch` out of the manifest. It gets _really_ complex, and error prone (as @rodesai suggested). I think it's do-able, but would definitely require a FizzBee proof (I think even the simple design should probably have a proof, too).

How about `compactor_epoch` in .manifest, but not .compactor file:

### On startup...

1. Compactor increments `compactor_epoch` in the latest .manifest file and writes to the next sequential .manifest position.
2. Compactor reads the current .compactor file (00005.compactor) and writes to the next sequential .compactor file (00006.compactor).
3. If 00006.compactor exists, compactor reads the latest .manifest
   1. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current compactor's epoch, die (fenced)
   2. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current compactor's epoch, still owner, goto (2) with 00007.compactor as the next file to fence
   3. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch < current compactor's epoch, panic (epoch went backwards?)
4. If there are any completed SRs in the latest .compactor file (read in (2)) that are not in the latest .manifest file (read in (1)), update the .manifest with the new SR/SSTs.
5. If manifest update fails (file already exists)...
   1. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current compactor's epoch, die (fenced)
   2. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current compactor's epoch, a non-compactor writer updated the manifest. goto (4)
   3. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch < current compactor's epoch, panic (epoch went backwards?)

At this point, all other compactors have been fenced and the .compactor and .manifest files are completely in sync.

### On compaction job progress...

1. Compactor writes to the next .compactor file with the latest progress (00006.compactor in our example)
2. If the file exists, die (fenced)

### On compaction job complete...

1. Write the current compactor state (including the completed compaction job) to the next .compactor file (steps (1) and (2) in the "progress" section, above).
2. Read the latest .manifest
3. Update in-memory .manifest state to reflect the latest SRs/SSTs that were created (and remove old SRs/SSTs).
4. Write the in-memory .manifest state to the next sequential .manifest file. If the file exists...
   1. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current compactor's epoch, die (fenced, the new compactor will add these SRs to the manifest)
   2. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current compactor's epoch, a non-compactor writer updated the manifest, goto (2)
   3. If latest .manifest compactor_epoch < current compactor's epoch, panic (epoch went backwards?)

Fundamentally, I think this exactly mirrors how we handle writer fencing with the WAL:

https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0001-manifest.md#writers

In that protocol, we have a `writer_epoch` in the .manifest and we don't keep that epoch in the WAL .sst files. In the proposal above, we do the same (`compactor_epoch` in .manifest and no epcoh in `.compactor` file). You can think of this as `writer_epoch` is to sequential WAL SST as `compactor_epoch` is to sequential `.compactor` file. In both cases, we bump the epoch in the manifest, then attempt to fence old writers by appending a no-op write (empty for the WAL sst, identical state for .compactor file).

The compactor does have an additional step: once it's successfully fenced any older writers, it has to sync any completed SRs from the .compaction file that aren't yet in the .manifest. This has to happen because a previous compactor could have successfully written a completed compaction job to the .compactor file and then gotten fenced out when attempting to update the .manifest.

@sujeetsawala I think we'll need a fizzbee proof for htis.

> **Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

Reviewer 2: Yep, that makes sense @criccomini. I like that better then what I was thinking (maintaining the epoch in both files), since there's a single source of truth for the compactor epoch.

> once it's successfully fenced any older writers, it has to sync any completed SRs from the .compaction file that aren't yet in the .manifest. This has to happen because a previous compactor could have successfully written a completed compaction job to the .compactor file and then gotten fenced out when attempting to update the .manifest.

This part is a bit tricky since the sorted runs don't use unique ids, so the compactor should be a little careful with the mutation it applies to ensure its safe. I think it should probably:
(1) assert that the ssts involved in the compaction match the ssts that it sees in the manifest before making its update. Either the old sorted runs with the old ssts should be there, or the new sorted run with the new ssts.
(2) have some protocol around keeping the compactor state in sync with the manifest. So immediately after updating the manifest with the result of a compaction, the compactor should update the compactor state to indicate the status of the completed compactions as finished (either by setting some status or removing the compaction)

#### **4. Recovery Strategy**
**Decision**: Smart recovery based on work preservation efficiency:
- **High efficiency** (>80% work preserved): Resume from last completed output SST
- **Low efficiency**: Full retry with exponential backoff

**Rationale**: Balances complexity vs. value - don't over-optimize recovery for cases where restart is simpler.

### **Data Model**
```

> Compaction (1) ──→ (N) CompactionJob

Reviewer: Should have created_ts fields for both `Compaction` and `CompactionJob`. Perhaps in `CompactionPhase`? The GC can use this info to prevent SST deletions that are still listed in an active Compaction or CompactionJob

Reviewer: > For stats and observability POV, I think we should have `created_ts` and `updated_ts` for Compaction. CompactionJob can have a `created_ts`. I was thinking of having `CompactionPhase` as an enum

Can you capture this in the RFC?

Author: Yes.

    ├── sources: Vec<SourceId>
    ├── destination: u32  
    ├── job_attempts: Vec<CompactionJob>

>     └── current_phase: CompactionPhase

Author: I was thinking if we plan to show a different state in the public APIs for `Compaction`. Possibly keep an abstraction between internal and external compaction states.

Else we can remove the current_phase field from `Compaction`

>     └── current_phase: CompactionPhase

Reviewer: Sounds good. And I suppose there's a period of time where there are no `CompactionJob`s, but the `Compaction` exists and is written to the .compactor file.

>     └── current_phase: CompactionPhase

Reviewer: > However, for manual compaction requests, we would need to persist the ManualCompactionRequest in the manual_compaction_queue in the object_store. In this case, there would be a time period wherein there would be no assigned CompactionJob but Compaction exists.

Yea, this is what I was getting at. If you don't persist the `Compaction`s, then you end up needing a `ManualCompactionRequest`. If the compactor already persists `Compaction`, then you can piggy back off that data type for manual compaction requests as well. It seems cleaner to me. I suppose we could add a `request_source` field to the `Compaction` type in the .fbs to define where it came from (and if it's manual or not). I think this would obviate the need for a separate manual queue.

CompactionJob
    ├── attempt_number: u32
    ├── progress: CompactionProgress  
    ├── status: CompactionJobStatus
    └── existing_output_ssts: Option<Vec<SsTableId>>

> CompactionProgress

Author: Yes. I will update the struct. Could you help me understand how does it benefit flatbuffers?

> CompactionProgress

Reviewer: Oh, flatbuffers are just annoying to deal with. Their types are really funky and we have to do a bunch of work in `flatbuffer_types.rs` to go back and forth between them. The flatter (hah) they are, the better, IMO.

    ├── input_ssts_completed: Vec<SsTableId>
    ├── output_ssts_written: Vec<SsTableId>
    ├── bytes_read/written: u64
    └── current_phase: CompactionPhase
```

### **Persistent State Storage**

#### **Object Store Layout**
The compaction state is persisted to the object store following the same CAS pattern as manifests, ensuring consistency and reliability:

```

> /compactor_state_000000001.fbs  # First compactor state

Reviewer: Nit: how about `"{:020}.compactor"`? This will follow the same pattern as `get_manifest_path` in store.rs. Also, `.fbs` is usually used for the plaintext, not byte encoded files.

Author: Yes this makes sense. I will update the doc. This also makes it similar to the manifest pattern.

/compactor_state_000000002.fbs  # Updated state after compactions
/compactor_state_000000003.fbs  # Current state
```

#### **CompactionState Structure**

> The persistent state contains the complete view of all compaction activity:

Reviewer: It would be helpful to have the .fbs definitions as well. This will help me understand the relationship between in-memory and in-object store state.

We normally have `.fbs` files, which get generated into `.rs` files with `flatc`. Then we have a codec (`flatbuffer_types.rs`), which translates the raw FlatBuffer-generated Rust structs into our own easy-to-use, in-memory structs. For example, manifest.fbs (ManifestV1) ➜ manifest_generated.rs (ManifestV1) ➜ flatbuffer_types.rs (FlatBufferManifestCodec) ➜ mod.rs (Manifest).

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Serialize, Deserialize)]
pub struct CompactionState {
    /// Fencing token to ensure single active compactor
    /// Incremented each time a new compactor takes control
    pub compactor_epoch: u64,
    
    /// Next state ID to use for CAS operations
    /// Current state ID = this value - 1
    pub next_compactor_state_id: u64,
    
    /// All currently active compactions indexed by ID
    /// Includes queued, running, and recently completed compactions

>     pub active_compactions: HashMap<CompactionId, Compaction>,

Reviewer: Nit: let's use BTreeMap for these so they are sorted deterministically. This will protect us when doing DST.

Author: Curious: What is DST?

    
    /// Historical record of completed compaction jobs
    /// Used for statistics and debugging, cleaned up by GC

>     pub job_history: HashMap<CompactionJobId, CompactionJob>,

Reviewer: "cleaned up by GC", are you suggesting the GC modifies this field in memory/in the .compactor file?

I'm inclined to remove this field. The debugging/stats can be generated off of historical `.compactor` files.

Author: Yes. This can be removed. The compactor process can provide the stats till the time it is alive. For debugging and further historical data analytics, I think this data can be routed via a metrics endpoint to a customer source.

    
    /// Queue of pending manual compaction requests
    /// Processed in priority order by the active compactor
    pub manual_compaction_queue: Vec<ManualCompactionRequest>,
    
    /// Aggregated performance and reliability statistics

>     pub statistics: CompactionStatistics,

Reviewer: These are currently stored in the `Compactor`, I believe. What is the intent in moving them to the state? We typically keep stats out of state (e.g. DbState doesn't contain DbStats).

Author: I missed this. This was part of the smart Compaction idea wherein we use these stats to decide whether we use the last completed state or retry completely based on the size of the SST and amount of work done.

I think we can remove it. Updated the document.

    
    /// Timestamp of last coordination with garbage collector
    /// Used to prevent GC from removing SSTs still being compacted

>     pub last_gc_coordination_ts: DateTime<Utc>,

Reviewer: I _think_ we don't need this since we have `active_compactions` now. The GC should be able to take the min of the running GCs to determine its starting point for `min_age`.

    
    /// Active configuration settings for compaction behavior

>     pub configuration: CompactionConfiguration,

Reviewer: Curious about this as well. As with the stats, the `Compactor` takes options (config) right now. This is the pattern we typically have.

    
    /// Timestamp when this state was created/last updated
    pub state_timestamp: DateTime<Utc>,
}
```

#### **CAS-Based Atomic Updates**
State updates follow the same CAS pattern as manifest updates for guaranteed atomicity:

1. **Read current state** and extract `next_compactor_state_id`
2. **Apply pending updates** to create new state with incremented ID
3. **Write new state file** using CAS operation with `if-none-match: *`

> 4. **Retry entire operation** if CAS fails, ensuring atomic state transitions

Reviewer: If CAS fails, I think we'd need to fail (if the written file's epoch is >= the current processes' epoch), or refresh the compactor state and either merge or discard our changes. To keep it simple, the current process could simply discard its current work and re-write the latest .compactor file to attempt to fence other (older) compactors out.

Reviewer: (I think all three scenarios (<, ==, >) should be captured in the RFC)

Author: I will update the RFC with details of the above scenarios.

Author: > Trying to make sure I understand the discussion here.
> 
> There's 2 scenarios - compactor initialization bumping the epoch to E and a running initialized compactor with epoch E updating the state file:
> 
> compactor initialization bumping the epoch to E:
> 
> if it's write fails and the epoch is < E, then it retries bumping the epoch to E
> if it's write fails and the epoch is >= E, then it decides it's been fenced and exits
> 
> initialized compactor with epoch E updating the state file:
> 
> if it's write fails and the epoch < E, it panics (should never happen)
> if it's write fails and the epoch is E, it retries the write by first reading the compactor state file, merging changes, and then reapplying its mutation. This can happen if some non-compactor process writes the state file. For example, the CLI might write it to enqueue a new compaction request.
> if it's write fails and the epoch > E, it decides its fenced and exits.
> 
> Is that a reasonable summary?

Yes.

[This logic would require some changes to re-process the partially processed]
4. A `CompactionExecutor` executes these grouped SSTs by spawning tasks that execute the `compactionJob`.[No change required]
5. The task loads all the iterators in a `MergeIterator` struct and runs compactions on it. It discards older expired versions and continues to write to a SST. Once the SST reaches it's threshold size, the SST is written to the active destination SR. Periodically the task also provides stats on task progress. [Need to persist the new SST to the compaction state in object store]
6. When a task completes compaction execution, the task returns the {destinationId, outputSSTs} to the `CompactionEventHandler`
7. `CompactionEventHandler` is responsible to update in-memory compaction state, cleanup the job task, write logs and update manifest. [Need to update the compaction persistence state]
8. GC clears the orphaned states and SSTs during it's run.

### Resuming Partial Compactions

1. When the output SSTs of partially completed compactions are fetched, pick the lastKey from the SST.
2. In all the remaining input SSTs, move the iterator to a key greater than or equal to the lastKey.

> 3. This is done by doing a binary search on a SST to find the right block and then iterating till we find the rightKey.

Author: > we'll need to iterate over the ssts in the sorted run first. The iterators already support this via the seek fn
Yes, you are correct but I had mentioned what we needed to do for an SST since SR would be a collection of SST.

> so all we'd need to do is extend seek to support specifying an optional sequence number
don't we need to pick the latest sequence number for a given key

    - [Distributed Compaction](#distributed-compaction)

<!-- TOC end -->

Status: In Review

Authors:

* [Sujeet Sawala](https://github.com/sujeetsawala)

## Background

Compaction currently happens for the following:
- L0 SSTs
- Various level Sorted Runs(Range partitioned SST across the complete keyspace)

This RFC proposes the goals & design for compaction state persistence along with ways to improve current compaction mechanism by adding retries and tracking.

## Goals

- Provide a mechanism to track progress of a `CompactionJob`
- Allow retrying compactions based on the state of the `CompactionJob`
- Improve observability around Compactions
- Separate out compaction related details from `Manifest` into a separate `CompactionManifest`
- Coordination between `Manifest` and `CompactionManifest`
- Coordination mechanism between externally triggered compactions and the main compaction process.

## Non-Goals

- Distributed Compaction: SlateDb is a single writer and currently a single-compactor based database. With distributed compaction, we plan to further parallelise SSTs compaction across different compaction processes. This topic is out of scope of the RFC.

> - Resume logic of partial compactor in case of MVCC because it would depend on the structure of Sorted run. How would the keyspace be partitioned across SSTs of an SR in a non-overlapping manner when MVCC changes are added?

Author: Yes. 
This is with regard to the snapshots that would be supported as part of the `Transaction` RFC. With introduction of snapshots, a key could span across multiple contiguous SSTs and we would need a `min_seq_no` field in .manifest to identify the minimum supported sequence number.

I will update the above sentence.

> - Resume logic of partial compactor in case of MVCC because it would depend on the structure of Sorted run. How would the keyspace be partitioned across SSTs of an SR in a non-overlapping manner when MVCC changes are added?

Author: Updated the sentence.

#### **5. Migrate `compaction_epoch` from Manifest to CompactionState**
**Decision**: Deprecate `compaction_epoch` from Manifest.

**Rationale**: 
- Clean separation: DB state vs process coordination
- Process independence: Compactor can run separately
- Logical grouping: Epoch lives with compaction concerns

### **Persistent State Storage**

#### **Object Store Layout**
The compaction state is persisted to the object store following the same CAS pattern as manifests, ensuring consistency and reliability:

```
/000000001.compactor  # First compactor state
/000000002.compactor  # Updated state after compactions
/000000003.compactor  # Current state
```

#### **CompactionState Structure**
The persistent state contains the complete view of all compaction activity:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Serialize, Deserialize)]
pub struct CompactionState {
    /// Fencing token to ensure single active compactor
    /// Incremented each time a new compactor takes control
    pub compactor_epoch: u64,
    
    /// Compactor state identifier. This would be used for creating
    /// compactor files and CAS updates

>     pub compactor_state_id: u64,

Reviewer 2: what's in this field?

Author: The name(id) of the .compactor file

    
    /// All currently active compactions indexed by ID
    /// Includes queued, running, and recently completed compactions
    pub active_compactions: BTreeMap<CompactionId, Compaction>,
        
    /// Timestamp when this state was created/last updated
    pub state_timestamp: DateTime<Utc>,
}
```
The section below is under discussion here: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2239561471

### Protocol for State Management of Manifest and CompactionState

This a proposol for Statement Management of Manifest and CompactionState. The protocol is based on the following principals:

- Compaction is an entity owned by the Compactor. Therefore, the `compactor_epoch` and the compacted `SortedRuns` are also owned by the Compactor.
- CAS based update of the .compactor file ensures consistent view of the compactionState to all the compactor processes.

#### On startup...
1. Compactor fetches the latest .manifest file (00005.manifest).

2. Compactor now fetches the latest .compactor file (00005.compactor). 

> 3. It builds a dirty compactionState by merging L0 SSTs and SortedRuns across both files.

Reviewer 2: where are the contents of the compactor file documented? Is it the `CompactorState` above? That doesn't have anything about sorted runs

Author: It would be part of the existing `Compaction` struct.

Author: I have created the flatbuffer definition of `Compaction`. 
https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#diff-b1bb18c7341d7738f72cb3dc29d37a77acb79334c81b6925f61e4c68bb9cc7f5R44

I think it makes sense to have a list of SRs in the `CompactionState` as first class entities. Updated.

Reviewer: So, this implies we now have the "current" SRs in both the manifest and the compactor state. But they could diverge since the compactor can front-run the manifest by writing its new SRs to the compactor file before writing them to the manifest, right?

    - Copy SortedRuns from .compactor file to compactionState

    - Add and delete L0 SSTs of .manifest in compactionState

4. Compactor increments `compactor_epoch` in the dirty CompactionState and writes the dirty CompactionState to the next sequential .compactor position.(00006.compactor). Two level validation:

    Epoch Check fails, compactor is fenced

    File version check (in-memory and remote object store), If 00006.compactor exists, 

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor's epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor's epoch, die (fenced)

      ( in case of external processes like CLI sending a compaction request, the compaction persistence in the CompactionState would be done by the active Compactor)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor's epoch, increment the .compactor file ID by 1 and retry. This process would continue until successful compactor write.
      ( The current active compactor Job would have updated the .compactor file)

> 

Reviewer 2: It needs to write the manifest after writing the compactor file. That's mentioned in the summary below, but not here

4. These {key, seq_number, sst_iterator} tuple is then added to a min_heap to decide the right order across a group of SRs( can be thought of as a way to get a sorted list from all the sorted SR SSTs).

5. Once the above is constructed, compaction logic continues to create output SST of 256MB with 4KB blocks each. 

Note:
 - Step (3) and (4) are already implemented in the `seek()` in merge_iterator. It should handle Tombstones, TTL/Expiration
 - Ensure the CLI requests are executed on the active Compactor process

### **Key Design Decisions**

#### **1. Persistence Boundaries**
**Decision**: Persist state at the critical boundary:
- **Output SST Completion**: Every ~256MB of written data (always persisted)

**Rationale**: Output SST completions provide the best recovery value per persistence operation. Each represents significant completed work that we don't want to lose.

#### **2. Enhanced Job Model**  
**Decision**: Change from 1:1 to 1:N relationship between Compaction and CompactionJob.

**Rationale**: Enables retry logic, progress tracking, and recovery without breaking existing compaction scheduling logic.

#### **3. State Management Pattern**

> **Decision**: Mirror the existing `ManifestStore` pattern with `CompactorStore`.

Reviewer 3: I'm still struggling to grasp the mental model for tracking compactions. In my mind, what we want is a log of work that the current compaction has done so that when a failure happens we can either "rollback" the log (discard the work) or continue from where the compactor left off.

It seems like in the current proposal we have a bit more of a state maintenance mental model where we are trying to keep track of the current state directly (tracks active compactions, and their progress). That leads to a lot of complexity making sure that the state is never out of sync with what is happening.

What if instead of using the manifest protocol we used the WAL protocol for compaction tracking? Basically we have three different types of "Compaction WAL" (CWAL) operations:

1. Start new compaction. Records `NEW [compactor_epoch, compaction_id, [compactions]` before starting a new compaction.
2. Record progress. Records `MARK [compactor_epoch, compaction_id, [compactions]` before persisting any SSTs to the object store.
3. Record completion. Records `[SUCCESS/FAIL] [compactor_epoch, compaction_id]` before updating the manifest with the result of the new SR and removing the old SSTs/SRs.

If the compactor crashes and we need to recover, we can recover the compactor state from the CWAL:

1. If it fails before (1), then nothing needs to be recovered
2. If it fails after (1) but before any (2), we need to start the compaction from scratch. This is safe because nothing was written.
3. If it fails between `MARK`s then we can collect a list of all SSTs we expected to have been persisted for the given compaction and check to see that they were actually written. If they were not, we need to restart the compaction for those marks.
4. If it fails after all (2) but before (3), we notice that the compaction is done and we just need to retry 3.
5. If it fails after (3) but the manifest does not reflect the result we can reattempt (3) so long as we still own the compaction epoch.

If at any point we attempt to write a CWAL file that has a lower ID than the highest CWAL ID we fail because we've been fenced.

If at any point we notice the compactor epoch has passed our compactor epoch (we can occasionally sync the manifest) then we just discard all SSTs created by this compaction job, clean up and fail.

EDIT: after writing this I noticed @criccomini actually suggested something pretty similar here: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2246207838 -- I like taking the WAL approach and really just making this a WAL operation instead of one that tries to maintain full state.

Reviewer 3: We could even extend this protocol to easily allow external compactions to be scheduled by not failing if we try to write a CWAL entry that already exists. The protocol would then be to insert a CWAL file from an external writer with a `NEW` row in it. When the existing compactor attempts to write the next CWAL file, instead of failing it reconciles the CWAL:

1. if there's any mark or success/fail from an in progress compaction_id then we've been fenced and we should fail
2. if the only thing there is a `NEW` mark we can just add that compaction to our queue of compactions

Reviewer 3: Yes, you'd have to materialize it in memory to get to the final state. The benefit is that all of your writes are "append only" so you actually don't even really need to fence on conflicting WAL writes and you can do things like insert a compaction request from a third-party without resolving or fencing anything. To me it's a lot easier to reason about append-only log than conflicts with mutable state since you never "overwrite" anything and potentially ghost over something else that happened during a race -- you always read all the writes that happened.

> I didn't follow this - if we're tracking the state of all ongoing compactions we can also just elect not to update it after each SST has been written.

Ah yes, that makes sense to me.

Reviewer: (For the record, @vigneshc raised the idea of an incremental manifest log as well when we first set out to design the manifest and WAL protocol. We tabled that idea as well, since it was deemed more complex. The idea was that we would revisit it if we found the manifest writes grew too large.)

Reviewer 3: 🤔 that makes sense to me, I agree that if the code to recreate the CWAL is needed in multiple places this suddenly becomes a lot less attractive.

### **Persistent State Storage**

#### **Object Store Layout**
The compaction state is persisted to the object store following the same CAS pattern as manifests, ensuring consistency and reliability:

```
/000000001.compactor  # First compactor state
/000000002.compactor  # Updated state after compactions
/000000003.compactor  # Current state
```

#### **CompactionState Structure**
The persistent state contains the complete view of all compaction activity:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Serialize, Deserialize)]
pub struct CompactionState {
    /// Fencing token to ensure single active compactor
    /// Incremented each time a new compactor takes control
    pub compactor_epoch: u64,
    
    /// Compactor state identifier. This would be used for creating
    /// compactor files and CAS updates
    pub compactor_state_id: u64,

    // current Sorted Runs
    pub current_sorted_runs: [SortedRun];
    
    /// All currently active compactions indexed by ID
    /// Includes queued, running, and recently completed compactions
    pub active_compactions: BTreeMap<CompactionId, Compaction>,
        
    /// Timestamp when this state was created/last updated

>     pub state_timestamp: DateTime<Utc>,

Author: I thought we might need this for observability purposes.

}
```
The section below is under discussion here: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2239561471

### Protocol for State Management of Manifest and CompactionState

This a proposol for Statement Management of Manifest and CompactionState. The protocol is based on the following principals:

- Compaction is an entity owned by the Compactor. Therefore, the `compactor_epoch` and the compacted `SortedRuns` are also owned by the Compactor.
- CAS based update of the .compactor file ensures consistent view of the compactionState to all the compactor processes.

#### On startup...

> 1. Compactor fetches the latest .manifest file (00005.manifest).

Author: We would need to hold information about the SSTs and partial SR written by the CompactionJob till the time we don't update the manifest file.

I have added an `active_compaction` list that holds the list of `Compaction`. `Compaction` has fields like input SST, input SRs, output_ssts_written, etc.

Refer compactor.fbs

- **Uses natural boundaries**: SST completions provide ~256MB recovery granularity  
- **Minimizes overhead**: Persistence aligns with existing I/O patterns
- **Scales cost-effectively**: Higher persistence frequency for larger, more valuable compactions

## Workflow

### Current Compaction Workflow

1. `Compactor` initialises the `CompactionScheduler` and `CompactionEventHandler` during startup. It also initialises event loop that periodically polls manifest, periodically logs and provides progress and handles completed compactions [No change required]

2.  The `CompactionEventHandler` refreshes the compaction state by merging it with the `current manifest`.

3. `CompactionEventHandler` communicates this compaction state to the `CompactionScheduler`(scheduler makes a call `maybeScheduleCompaction` with local database state).

4. `CompactionScheduler` is implemented by `SizeTieredCompactionScheduler` to decide and group L0 SSTs and SRs to be compacted together. It returns a list of `Compaction` that are ready for execution.

5. `CompactorEventHandler` iterates over the list of compactions and calls `submitCompaction()` if the count of running compaction is below the threshold.

> 6. The submitted compaction is validated that it is not being executed( by checking in the local `CompactorState`) and if true, is added to the `CompactorState` struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. The submitted compaction is validated that it is not being executed (by checking in the local `CompactorState`) and if true, is added to the `CompactorState` struct.
```

    - Resuming Partially executed compactions (covered separately in the section below)

    - Writing compaction_state updates to the .compactor file

    The CompactionExecutor would persist the compaction_state in .compactor file by updating the `compactions` param (refer state management protocol). Two possible options:

      - Each compactionExecutor Job tries writing to the .compactor file.

      - Writes the updated compacted_state to a blocking channel that would be listened and executed by the Compaction Event Handler. We can leverage `WorkerToOrchestratorMsg` enum with a oneshot ack to support blocking of the CompactionJob on the write. [Agreed]

10. Once the compactionJob is completed, follow the steps mentioned in the State Managment protocol.    

### Persisting External Compactions

The idea is to leverage the existing compaction workflow. Need a mechanism to plugin the external requests so that it can be picked and executed by the compaction worflow. The steps are outlined here:

1. Client provides the list of source_ssts and source_srs to be compacted by calling the method `submit_manual_compaction`.

> 2. Use the `pick_next_compaction` to transform the request into a list of compactions.

Author: `pick_next_compaction` is a function used in the `size_tiered_compaction`

2. Use the `pick_next_compaction` to transform the request into a list of compactions.

3. For each compaction in the input list of compactions, the compactor_state.rs executes its own `submit_compaction` method that would do the following validations against the compaction_state:

    - Check if the count of runnning compactions is less than the threshold. If yes, continue

    - Check if the source L0 SSTs and SRs are not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

    - Check if the destination SR is not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

>     - Check if creating new SR(as part of L0 compaction) would it form a tiered SR group and get compacted. If yes, do not create the SR.

Author: I don't see this as part of the PR changes. This has been fixed.

    - The existing validations in `submit_compaction` method.

  Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

4. When a compaction successfully validates, the status of the compaction is updated as `submitted` in the compaction_state and added/updated in the `new_compactions` list.

5. Try writing the compactor_state to the next sequential .compactor file.

    If file exists,

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor_state and pass `new_compactions` object to Step(3). This process would continue until successful .compactor file write or the `new_compaction` object is empty.
      [This would happen when the compactor has written a .compactor file]

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic
      ( Compactor_epoch going backwards)

    [When this step is successful, compaction is persisted in the .compactor file]

> Note: The validations added in this protocol are best effort as the authority to validate a compaction lies with the compactor daemon thread. For more details refer(https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695#discussion_r2289989866)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The validations added in this protocol are best effort. The authority to validate a compaction lies with the compactor daemon thread. For more details refer to https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695#discussion_r2289989866
```

### Resuming Partial Compactions

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. When the output SSTs (part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry (the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:
```

    - Add a lastKey in the metadata block of SST as suggested here:https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2243447106 similar to first key and fetch it from the metadata block 

>     - Once on the relevant SST, go to the last block by iterating the indexes. Iterate to the lastKey of the last block of the SST.[Agreed]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Once on the relevant SST, go to the last block by iterating the indexes. Iterate to the lastKey of the last block of the SST. (This is the accepted approach we'll implement.)
```

2. Ignore completed L0 SSTs and move the iterator on each SR to a key >= lastKey on SST partition

3. This is done by doing a binary search on a SR to find the right SST partition and then iterating the blocks of the SST till we find the Entry. 

>     [Note: A corner case: With monotonically overlapping SST ranges(specifically the last key), a key might be present across a contiguous range of SST in a SR]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    (Note: There's a corner case where there might be monotonically overlapping SST ranges. Specifically, the last key might be present across a contiguous range of SST in a SR.)
```

@flaneur2020 I seem to recall you making an update to ensure this doesn't happen. Did that get merged in? I can't find it (or perhaps it already worked this way?).

> 4. These {key, seq_number, sst_iterator} tuple is then added to a min_heap to decide the right order across a group of SRs( can be thought of as a way to get a sorted list from all the sorted SR SSTs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Each {key, seq_number, sst_iterator} tuple is then added to a min_heap to decide the right order across a group of SRs (this is a way to get a sorted list from all the sorted SR SSTs).
```

> 5. Once the above is constructed, compaction logic continues to create output SST of 256MB with 4KB blocks each and persist it to the .compactor file by updating the compaction in `compactions`. ( This is the CompactionJob progress section in State Management Protocol) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Once the above is constructed, compaction logic continues to create output SST of 256MB with 4KB blocks each and persists them to the .compactor file by updating the compaction in `compactions`. (This is the `CompactionJob` progress section in _State Management Protocol_.)
```

Note:
 - Step (3) and (4) are already implemented in the `seek()` in merge_iterator. It should handle Tombstones, TTL/Expiration

>  - Ensure the CLI requests are executed on the active Compactor process

Reviewer: Not sure what this note means. Is it still relevant?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### **2. Enhanced Job Model**  
**Decision**: Change from 1:1 to 1:N relationship between Compaction and CompactionJob.

**Rationale**: Enables retry logic, progress tracking, and recovery without breaking existing compaction scheduling logic.

#### **3. State Management Pattern**
**Decision**: Mirror the existing `ManifestStore` pattern with `CompactorStore`.

**Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

#### **4. Recovery Strategy**
- Resume from last completed output SST

The section below is under discussion here: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2239561471

### **Persistent State Storage**

#### **Object Store Layout**
The compaction state is persisted to the object store following the same CAS pattern as manifests, ensuring consistency and reliability:

```
/000000001.compactor  # First compactor state
/000000002.compactor  # Updated state after compactions
/000000003.compactor  # Current state
```

> The section below is under discussion here: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2239561471

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_NOTE: The section below is discussed in detail [here](https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2239561471)._
```

### Protocol for State Management of Manifest and CompactionState

This a proposal for Statement Management of Manifest and CompactionState. The protocol is based on the following principals:

- manifest should be source of truth for reader and writer clients (and should thus contain SRs)

- .compactor file should be an implementation detail of the compactor, not something the DB needs to pay any attention to.

> With this view, the entire .compactor file is a single implementation for our built-in (non-distributed) compactor. In fact, for distributed compaction, it need not matter at all. The core of our compaction protocol is simply: the owner of the compactor_epoch may manipulate the SRs and L0s in the manifest.

Reviewer: I'm tweaking this section slightly. It doesn't reflect the final verdict we arrived at in the Discord. The reason to include the .compactor file as part of the public API/protocol is so that clients can submit external compaction requests in a standardized way, regardless of which compactor is running. It also means we can have standardized compactor observability tooling, standard CLI tools, etc.

```suggestion
With this view, the .compactor file is public API comprised of a schema and update protocol. As long as a compactor adheres to this schema and update protocol, it is compatible with SlateDB. Our built-in (non-distributed) compactor is but one implementation. A distributed compactor can do what it wants (maintain state in etcd, for example) so long as it updates the .compactor and .manifest files appropriately. The core of our compaction protocol is simply: the owner of the compactor_epoch may manipulate the SRs and L0s in the manifest and update the .compactor file.
```

Author: Ack. I had updated this based on our earlier discussion on compaction state protocol.

> The .compactor file would serve as an interface over which clients can build their custom distributed compactions say based on etcd(k8s), chitchat, object_store, etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The .compactor file would serve as an interface over which clients can build their custom distributed compactions say based on etcd (Kubernetes), [chitchat](https://github.com/quickwit-oss/chitchat), `object_store`, etc. 
```

> They can have separate files for any approach specific state persistence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can have separate files for any approach specific to their state persistence needs.
```

#### On startup...

> 1. Compactor fetches the latest .compactor file (00005.compactor). 

Reviewer 2: Not to beat a dead horse, but was thinking about this a bit more and I think it would be better to bump the manifest epoch first and then the compactor epoch. So it's still the same protocol essentially, but we use the manifest as the source of truth for the compactor epoch and bump it there first, and then write out the compactor file.

The reason is that it makes it easier if we ever want to make a breaking change to the compactor state schema. We can do that by just having the compactor on the new schema write to a file with a new suffix like `00000.2.compactor`. The compactor on the new version doesn't _need_ to know anything about the old schema or touch the old file. Compactions that were in that file would get forgotten about, but that's probably ok for a rare breaking change like that. A zombie compactor on the old version would just get fenced when if/when it tries to write the manifest. We could have the new version include some migration code that fences the old schema and migrates everythign to the new one, but we don't _have_ to. Basically doing it this way just reduces the level of compatibility we absolutely need to maintain across versions.

Author: I had asked for the consensus on this in the discord thread. Everyone agreed with the current protocol. 
cc: @criccomini

Reviewer: I was not strongly opinionated about either way, but @rodesai's point makes sense. I think we should update to .manifest first based on this.

Reviewer: LGTM. Left a minor not on panic vs. die (fenced).

Author: Updated

2. Compactor fetches the latest .manifest file (00005.manifest).

3. Compactor increments `compactor_epoch` and writes the dirty CompactionState to the next sequential .compactor position.(00006.compactor).

>     File version check (in-memory and remote object store), If 00006.compactor exists, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    File version check (in-memory and remote object store): if 00006.compactor exists, 
```

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, increment the .compactor file ID by 1 and retry. This process would continue until successful compactor write.
      ( The current active compactor Job would have updated the .compactor file)

> 4. If compactor_epoch in in-memory manifest(00005.manifest) >= `compactor_epoch`, the compactor is fenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If compactor_epoch in in-memory manifest (00005.manifest) >= `compactor_epoch`, older compactors are fenced now.
```

5. Try writing the above `compaction_epoch` to the .manifest file (00006.manifest)

>     File version check (in-memory and remote object store), If 00006.manifest exists, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    File version check (in-memory and remote object store): if 00006.manifest exists, 
```

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, panic

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, increment the .manifest file ID by 1 and retry. This process would continue until successful compactor write.

>       ( The current active compactor Job would have updated the .manifest file)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      (The current active compactor has updated the .manifest file)
```

> At this point, the compactor has been successfully initialised. Any updates to write a new .compactor(00006.compactor) or .manifest file(00006.manifest) by stale compactors would fence them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the compactor has been successfully initialised. Any updates to write a new .compactor (00006.compactor) or .manifest file (00006.manifest) by stale compactors would fence them.
```

> #### On compaction initiation...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### On compaction job creation...
```

(Manifest is polled periodically to get the list of L0 SSTs created. The scheduler would create a list of new compactions for these L0 SSTs as well)

> 1. Compactor Fetches the latest .manifest file during the manifest poll.(00006.manifest)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Compactor Fetches the latest .manifest file during the manifest poll. (00006.manifest)
```

2. Compactor writes to the next .compactor file the list of scheduled compactions with the empty JobAttempts (00007.compactor in our example).

>     If the file(00007.compactor) exists, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the file (00007.compactor) exists, 
```

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor state and go to step (2)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic

>         (compactor_epoch going backwards)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        (`compactor_epoch` went backwards)
```

#### On compaction job progress...

> 1. Compactor writes to the next .compactor file the compactionState(persist when an SST is added to SR) with the latest progress (00008.compactor in our example).
> 
>     If the file(00008.compactor) exists, 
> 
>       - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)
> 
>       - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor state and go to step (2)
> 
>       - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic
>         (compactor_epoch going backwards)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Compactor writes to the next .compactor file the compactionState (persist when an SST is added to SR) with the latest progress (00008.compactor in our example).

    If the file (00008.compactor) exists, 

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor state and go to step (2)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic
        (`compactor_epoch` went backwards)
```

#### On compaction job complete...

1. Write the current compactor state (including the completed compaction job) to the next sequential .compactor file(00009.compactor) (steps (1) and (2) in the "progress" section, above).

2. Update in-memory .manifest state (fetched in compaction initiation phase) with the compaction state to reflect the latest SRs/SSTs that were created (and remove old SRs/SSTs).

> 3. Write the in-memory .manifest state to the next sequential .manifest file. If the file(00007.manifest) exists, it could be due to two possibilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Write the in-memory .manifest state to the next sequential .manifest file. If the file (00007.manifest) exists, it could be due to three possibilities:
```

>     - Writer has written a new manifest.
> 
>     - Reader has written a new manifest with new checkpoints.
> 
>     - Compactor has written a new manifest.
> 
>     In both the cases, 
> 
>       - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current manifest epoch, die (fenced)
> 
>       - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current manifest epoch, reconcile with the latest manifest and write to the next sequential(00008.manifest) .manifest file
> 
>       (Writer would have flushed L0 SSTs or updated checkpoint to the manifest)
> 
>       - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch < current manifest epoch, panic
>         (compactor_epoch going backwards)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Writer has written a new manifest.

    - Reader has written a new manifest with new checkpoints.

    - Compactor has written a new manifest.

    In any case, 

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current manifest epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current manifest epoch, reconcile with the latest manifest and write to the next sequential(00008.manifest) .manifest file

      (Writer could have flushed L0 SSTs or updated checkpoint to the manifest)

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch < current manifest epoch, panic
        (`compactor_epoch` went backwards)
```

### Summarised Protocol

```

> 1. Compactor A fetches the latest .manifest file(00001.manifest)
> 
> 2. Compactor A fetches the latest .compactor file(00001.compactor)
> 
> 3. Compactor A writes .compactor file(00002.compactor) with compactor_epoch(compactor_epoch = 1)
> 
> 4. If compactor_epoch in .manifest file(00001.manifest) >= compactor_epoch(compactor_epoch = 1), fenced
> 
> 5. Compactor A writes .manifest file(00002.manifest) with compactor_epoch(compactor_epoch = 1)
> 
> (Compactions are scheduled based on the latest manifest poll and CompactionJob updates the .compactor file with the in progress SR state) 
> 
> After compactionJob completion...,
> 
> 6. Update in-memory .manifest(00002.manifest) state to reflect the latest SRs/SSTs that were created (and remove old SRs/SSTs) from the latest .compactor file.
> 
> 7. Write the in-memory .manifest state to the next sequential .manifest file.
> 
> 8. If the file(00007.manifest) exists, it could be due to two possibilities:
>      - Writer has written a new manifest.
>      - Reader has written a new manifest.
>      - Compactor has written a new manifest.
> 
>  In both cases, compare the `compactor_epoch` in both .manifest file and the local manifest file and write manifest to next sequential file if the compactor is not fenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Compactor A fetches the latest .manifest file (00001.manifest)

2. Compactor A fetches the latest .compactor file (00001.compactor)

3. Compactor A writes .compactor file (00002.compactor) with compactor_epoch (compactor_epoch = 1)

4. If compactor_epoch in .manifest file (00001.manifest) >= compactor_epoch (compactor_epoch = 1), fenced

5. Compactor A writes .manifest file (00002.manifest) with compactor_epoch (compactor_epoch = 1)

(Compactions are scheduled based on the latest manifest poll and CompactionJob updates the .compactor file with the in progress SR state) 

After compactionJob completion...,

6. Update in-memory .manifest (00002.manifest) state to reflect the latest SRs/SSTs that were created (and remove old SRs/SSTs) from the latest .compactor file.

7. Write the in-memory .manifest state to the next sequential .manifest file.

8. If the file (00007.manifest) exists, it could be due to three possibilities:
     - Writer has written a new manifest.
     - Reader has written a new manifest.
     - Compactor has written a new manifest.

In any case, compare the `compactor_epoch` in both .manifest file and the local manifest file and write manifest to next sequential file if the compactor is not fenced.
```

    - [Incorrect Read order of manifest and compactionState](#incorrect-read-order-of-manifest-and-compactionstate)
    - [Fenced Compactor Process trying to update manifest](#fenced-compactor-process-trying-to-update-manifest)
    - [Fenced Compactor Process trying to update manifest](#fenced-compactor-process-trying-to-update-manifest-1)
  - [Gaps in compactor_epoch in .manifest file](#gaps-in-compactor_epoch-in-manifest-file)
  - [External Process Integration](#external-process-integration)
  - [Garbage Collection Integration](#garbage-collection-integration)
  - [Observability Enhancements](#observability-enhancements)
    - [Progress Tracking](#progress-tracking)
    - [Statistics](#statistics)
  - [Cost Analysis](#cost-analysis)
    - [Operation Count Breakdown](#operation-count-breakdown)
    - [Cloud Cost Analysis](#cloud-cost-analysis)
    - [Recovery Efficiency Analysis](#recovery-efficiency-analysis)
    - [Scaling Analysis](#scaling-analysis)
  - [Future Extensions](#future-extensions)

<!-- TOC end -->

Status: In Review

Authors:

* [Sujeet Sawala](https://github.com/sujeetsawala)

## Background

Compaction currently happens for the following:
- L0 SSTs

> - Various level Sorted Runs(Range partitioned SST across the complete keyspace)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Various level Sorted Runs (range partitioned SST across the complete keyspace)
```

- Coordination mechanism between externally triggered compactions and the main compaction process.
- Refactor Manifest store so that it can be used to store both ,manifest and .compactor files.

## Non-Goals

- Distributed Compaction: SlateDb is a single writer and currently a single-compactor based database. With distributed compaction, we plan to further parallelise SSTs compaction across different compaction processes. This topic is out of scope of the RFC.
- Resuming partial compaction under MVCC depends on the sorted-run layout: with multi-versioned keys, how do we partition the keyspace into non-overlapping SSTs within a single SR?

## Constraints

- Changes should be backward compatible and extend the existing compaction structs
- State updates should be cost efficient
- Manifest can be eventually consistent with the latest view after comapaction

## References

- [Compaction RFC](https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0002-compaction.md)
- [Universal Compaction](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/universal-compaction)

## Problem Statement

This RFC extends discussions in the below github issue. It also addresses several other sub-issues.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### **Impact**
- **Large compactions** (multi-GB) lose hours of work on failure
- **Engineering overhead** for debugging and manually restarting failed compactions  
- **Customer impact** from extended recovery times during outages
- **Resource waste** from repeated processing of the same data

## Proposal

### **Core Strategy: Iterator-Based Persistence**

Rather than complex chunking mechanisms, we leverage SlateDB's existing iterator architecture which provides natural persistence boundaries at **SST completion points**. This approach:

- **Builds on existing infrastructure**: Enhances current `execute_compaction` method
- **Uses natural boundaries**: SST completions provide ~256MB recovery granularity  
- **Minimizes overhead**: Persistence aligns with existing I/O patterns
- **Scales cost-effectively**: Higher persistence frequency for larger, more valuable compactions

## Workflow

### Compaction Workflow

1. `Compactor` initialises the `CompactionScheduler` and `CompactionEventHandler` during startup. It also initialises event loop that periodically polls manifest, periodically logs and provides progress and handles completed compactions [No change required]

> 2.  The `CompactionEventHandler` refreshes the compaction state by merging it with the `current manifest`.

Author: > Isn't the compactor state held in the .compactor file, not the .manifest file? Or are you referring only to the compactor_epoch in the .manifest file here?

This section represents the current compaction workflow( with no persistence changes).

12. In case of failure, the compaction_state is updated by calling `finishFailedCompaction()`

13. GC clears the orphaned states and SSTs during it's run.

#### **CompactionState Structure**
The persistent state contains the complete view of all compaction activity:

```rust

pub(crate) struct CompactionJob {
    pub(crate) id: Uuid,
    pub(crate) destination: u32,
    pub(crate) ssts: Vec<SsTableHandle>,
    pub(crate) sorted_runs: Vec<SortedRun>,
    pub(crate) compaction_ts: i64,
    pub(crate) is_dest_last_run: bool,
    pub(crate) completed_input_sst_ids: Vec<Ulid>;
    pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;
    pub(crate) output_sr: SortedRun;
}

pub(crate) enum CompactionType {
    Internal,
    External,
}

pub struct Compaction {
    pub(crate) status: CompactionStatus,
    pub(crate) sources: Vec<SourceId>,
    pub(crate) destination: u32,
    pub(crate) compaction_id: Ulid,
    pub(crate) compaction_type: CompactionType,
    pub(crate) job_attempts: Vec<CompactionJob>;
}

> pub(crate) CompactorState {

Author: I will update it as a pre-requisite.

    manifest: DirtyManifest
    compaction_state: DirtyCompactionState
}

pub(crate) struct CompactionState {
    compactor_epoch: u64,
    // active_compactions queued, in-progress and completed
    compactions: HashMap<Ulid, Compaction>,
}

pub(crate) struct DirtyCompactionState {
    id: u64,
    compactor_epoch: u64,
    compaction_state: CompactionState,
}

pub(crate) struct StoredCompactionState {
    id: u64,
    compaction_state: CompactionState,
    compaction_state_store: Arc<CompactionStateStore>,
}

pub(crate) struct FenceableCompactionState {
    compaction_state: StoredCompactionState,
    local_epoch: u64,
    stored_epoch: fn(&CompactionState) -> u64,
}
```

### Persisting Internal Compactions

1. Compactor fetches compactions from the compaction_state polled during this compactionEventLoop iteration with the compactionStatus as `submitted` and returns a list of compactions.

2. Size_tiered_compaction compaction scheduler executes `maybe_schedule_compaction` and appends to this list of compactions.

> 3. Compactor executes the `submit_compaction` method on the list of compactions from Step(1). The method delegates the validation of the compactions to the compactor_state.rs.

Author: This is the best effort. We can remove this completely as well, there is a validation on the compactor side.

> 3. Compactor executes the `submit_compaction` method on the list of compactions from Step(1). The method delegates the validation of the compactions to the compactor_state.rs.

Reviewer: I don't feel the validation logic should be _inside_ `compactor_state.rs`. We can work out where exactly the validation happens in code (in the compactor_state.rs vs. elsewhere in the code) in the PR, though.

    - Add compaction validations to verify correct group of sources and destinations are selected. Reference: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0002-compaction.md#compactions.

    - The existing validations in `submit_compaction` method.

4. When a compaction successfully validates, it is appended to the local copy of compactor_state `active_compaction` param and `new_compactions` list.

5. Try writing the compactor_state to the next sequential .compactor file.

    If file exists,

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor_state and pass `new_compactions` object to Step(3). This process would continue until successful .compactor file write or the `new_compaction` object is empty.

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic
      ( Compactor_epoch going backwards)

    [When this step is successful, compaction is persisted in the .compactor file]

6. Now, `start_compaction()` for each compaction in the `active_compaction` param if the count of running compactions is below threshold.

> 7. A new `CompactionJob` is created using the last job_attempt or afresh if it the first CompactionJob. The `CompactionJob` is then handed to the CompactionExecutor for execution.

Author: > using the last job_attempt

The initial state of the compactionJob like the completed_input_sst_ids, completed_input_sr_ids, output_sr from the last CompactionJob

> 7. A new `CompactionJob` is created using the last job_attempt or afresh if it the first CompactionJob. The `CompactionJob` is then handed to the CompactionExecutor for execution.

Reviewer: Ahh, gotcha. Ok, that makes sense.

1. Client provides the list of source_ssts and source_srs to be compacted by calling the method `submit_manual_compaction`.

2. Use the `pick_next_compaction` to transform the request into a list of compactions.

3. For each compaction in the input list of compactions, The compactor_state.rs executes its own `submit_compaction` method that would do the following validations against the compaction_state:

    - Check If the count of runnning compactions is less than the threshold. If yes, continue

    - Check if the source L0 SSTs and SRs are not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

    - Check if the destination SR is not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

    - Check if creating new SR(as part of L0 compaction) would it form a tiered SR group and get compacted. If yes, do not create the SR.

    - Add compaction validations to verify correct group of sources and destinations are selected. Reference: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0002-compaction.md#compactions.

    - The existing validations in `submit_compaction` method.

> 4. When a compaction successfully validates, it is appended to the local copy of compactor_state `active_compaction` param and `new_compactions` list.

Author: done

5. Try writing the compactor_state to the next sequential .compactor file.

    If file exists,

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor_state and pass `new_compactions` object to Step(3). This process would continue until successful .compactor file write or the `new_compaction` object is empty.

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic
      ( Compactor_epoch going backwards)

    [When this step is successful, compaction is persisted in the .compactor file]

### Resuming Partial Compactions

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Author: Oh.. so wouldn't this be a corner case since we are interested in the lastEntry written to the most recent SST created during SortedRun?

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Author: However, I think we should be fine since we are appending SSTs to the `output_sr`. We need to pick the last SST from the `output_sr` param.

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Reviewer: Yea, I think you're right, since we're appending SSTs. I suppose this race exists at the CompactionJob level since we're using Ulids for that. An incomplete compaction job could appear before a complete one in the sorted btree. I think that's fine though, we just have to iterate over all compactions rather than walking backwards.

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Reviewer: Compactor on machine 1 writes using t2
Machine 1 fails
Compactor is migrated to machine 2
Compactor on machine 2 writes using t1 (clock skew; machine 2 has clock slightly before machine 1)

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Author: Yes, this is correct. However, how would this affect our compaction workflow since we don't have any comparison on the compactionJob Ulid?

> 1. When the output SSTs(part of the partially completed destination SR) are fetched, pick the lastEntry(the lastEntry in lexicographic order) from the last SST of the SR. Possible Approaches:

Reviewer: We could have the list like this:

```
[
job_t0=complete
job_t1=complete
job_t2=incomplete
job_t3=complete
]
```

All I'm saying is we need to iterate the entire list, not walk backwards from the end. If we walked backward from the end until we find a "complete" we would not see job_t2.

        (compactor_epoch going backwards)

#### On compaction job progress...

1. Compactor writes to the next .compactor file the compactionState(persist when an SST is added to SR) with the latest progress (00008.compactor in our example).

    If the file(00008.compactor) exists, 

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, reconcile the compactor state and go to step (2)

      - If latest .compactor compactor_epoch < current compactor epoch, panic
        (compactor_epoch going backwards)

#### On compaction job complete...

1. Write the current compactor state (including the completed compaction job) to the next sequential .compactor file(00009.compactor) (steps (1) and (2) in the "progress" section, above).

2. Update in-memory .manifest state (fetched in compaction initiation phase) with the compaction state to reflect the latest SRs/SSTs that were created (and remove old SRs/SSTs).

3. Write the in-memory .manifest state to the next sequential .manifest file. If the file(00007.manifest) exists, it could be due to two possibilities:

>     - Writer has written a new manifest.

Reviewer: `DbReader` might have written a checkpoint as well.

Author: Updated.

- `slatedb compaction submit --sources SR1,SR2 --priority high` - Submit manual compaction
- `slatedb compaction status --id <compaction-id>` - Status of a compaction

We leverage `admin.rs` to expose methods that would be triggered during manual compactions requests from external process / CLI

```rust

// API method signature uses the public struct directly
pub async fn submit_manual_compaction(
    &self, 
    source_ssts: Vec<String>,
    source_srs: Vec<String>                         
) -> Result<CompactionInfo, Error>   

pub async fn get_compaction_info(
    &self,
    id: CompactionId
) -> Result<CompactionInfo, Error>           // ← Returns public struct directly

// API method returns vector of public struct
pub async fn list_compactions(
    &self,
    status_filter: Option<CompactionRequestStatus>  // ← Public enum
) -> Result<Vec<CompactionInfo>, Error> 

/// Status of a compaction job to be shown to the customer
#[derive(Debug, Clone, PartialEq)]
pub enum CompactionStatusResponse {
    Submitted,      // Waiting to be scheduled
    InProgress,     // Currently executing
    Completed,      // Successfully finished
    Failed,         // Failed with error

>     Cancelled,      // Cancelled by request

Reviewer: I think this should be removed for now?

Author: Updated

    pub completion_percentage: f64,
    /// Estimated completion time
    pub estimated_completion: Option<DateTime<Utc>>,
}

/// Detailed information about a compaction
#[derive(Debug, Clone)]
pub struct CompactionInfo {
    /// Unique identifier for the compaction
    pub id: CompactionId,
    /// Current status
    pub status: CompactionRequestStatus,
    /// Source SSTs being compacted
    pub source_ssts: Vec<String>,
    /// Source SRs being compacted
    pub source_srs: Vec<String>,
    /// Target Destination of compaction
    pub target: String,
    /// Current progress (if running)
    pub progress: Option<CompactionRequestProgress>,
    /// When the compaction was created
    pub created_at: DateTime<Utc>,
    /// When the compaction started (if applicable)
    pub started_at: Option<DateTime<Utc>>,
    /// When the compaction completed (if applicable)
    pub completed_at: Option<DateTime<Utc>>,
    /// Error message (if failed)
    pub error_message: Option<String>,
}
```

### **Garbage Collection Integration**
The garbage collection of .compactor file can leverage the existing logic of garbage collecting .sst files and .manifest files. 

> The .sst file is deemed to be garbage collected if it satisfies  the following conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The .sst file is deemed to be garbage collected if it satisfies the following conditions:
```

  - SST is older than the min age configured.

  - SST is not referenced by any active manifest checkpoint. 

> 

Reviewer: I think we should handle #604 as well (SST is not part of an active compaction).

Author: This denotes how the GC handles SSTs currently. I think #604 still needs to be implemented, right?

Reviewer: I think a brief note in this RFC describing the update to the GC is warranted.

10. When a task completes compaction execution, the task returns the {destinationId, outputSSTs} to the worker channel to act upon the compaction terminal state

11. The worker task executes the `finishCompaction()` upon successful `CompactionCompletion` and updates the manifests and trigger scheduling of next compactions by calling `maybeScheduleCompaction()`

12. In case of failure, the compaction_state is updated by calling `finishFailedCompaction()`

13. GC clears the orphaned states and SSTs during it's run.

#### **CompactionState Structure**
The persistent state contains the complete view of all compaction activity:

```rust
pub(crate) struct CompactionJob {
    pub(crate) id: Ulid,
    pub(crate) destination: u32,
    pub(crate) ssts: Vec<SsTableHandle>,
    pub(crate) sorted_runs: Vec<SortedRun>,
    pub(crate) compaction_ts: i64,
    pub(crate) is_dest_last_run: bool,
    pub(crate) completed_input_sst_ids: Vec<Ulid>;

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Author: > where are we tracking the completed SSTs as the compaction progresses? Is it output_sr?

yes

> Also what is completed_input_sst_ids/completed_input_sr_ids used for? Is it just informational?
This would avoid unnecessary seeks on the completed SSTs and SRs. We would skip these ssts and srs from the input list of SSTs and SRs respectively.

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Author: > Once we know the last key that was compacted we should be able to figure out which SSTs need to be searched based on the SST/SR metadata.

Correct. This would require seek() calls to get the iterator to a rowEntry. This means we would also seek SSTs/SRs that have already been completed( cases where the seek() would return SeekKeyOutOfKeyRange error or could return the iterator to the last element such that next() would return empty iterator)

With these completed Ids, we don't need to do seeks on these SST and SRs. Would just optimise iterator creation of SSTs and SRs.

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Reviewer 2: Can you show me what you mean with an example?

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Author: Consider a Compaction with the following sources: [SST-4, SST-3, SST-2, SST-1, SR-100, SR-50, SR-3, SR-1, SR-0]
 
completed_sst_ids: []
completed_sr_ids:[]
output_sr:[]

A compactionJob with Id Job1 loads iterators to all the SSTs in L0 SSTs( SST-4, SST-3, SST-2, SST-1) and SRs(SR-100, SR-50, SR-3, SR-1, SR-0). Since this is a full range scan, iterators are loaded to the first block of the SST( first SST in case of SR)

RetentionIterator holds the iterators in a sorted way for each RowEntry and adds it to the existing SST of the destination SR. On every compactionJob execution it needs to fetch all the iterators associated with the sources.

completed_sst_ids: [SST-1, SST-2]
completed_sr_ids:[SR-100, SR-50]
output_sr:[SR0(a new SR with the destinationId same as the existing one stored in .compactor file) ]

Now, let say the process crashes and the above compaction with the same input sources is re-attempted with CompactionJob with id JobId2. It would load iterators to all the input SSTs and SRs, add it to the heap that would be then read by the RetentionIterator.

But, we don't need iterators for SST-1, SST-2, SR-100 and SR-50 since their RowEntries would already be written to the output_sr.

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Reviewer 2: It's unlikely that we'd actually wind up in a state where some SSTs/SRs are completed until the later part of compaction, because the SSTs and SRs all cover the full key space. So when you're 75% of the way through the compaction, you're likely 75% of the way through each of the sources. This assumes a uniform distribution of keys. If you're doing semi-ordered inserts there might be some benefit, though it seems small compared to the cost of compacting itself. I'm not sure it's worth complicating the implementation. We can hash it out in the PRs though based on how much complexity it adds.

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Author: One of the use-case that I can think of: A case with heavy writes writing sequential keys. Say there are n L0 SST created. Since, these are sequential keys, all keys SST-0 < SST-1 < SST-2 < SST-3 < ... < SST-n

Compaction of such sources would benefit for the proposed approach because the destination SR created would be partitioned in the following SST order [SST-0, SST-1, SST-2, SST-3,...,SST-n]. If the compaction fails after adding [SST-0,SST-1,....SST-m], the next CompactionJob need not seek those.

We can hash it out in the implementation PR if it increases complexity.

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Author: @rodesai Can this be marked resolved if we are good?

>     pub(crate) completed_input_sr_ids: Vec<u32>;

Reviewer 2: Go for it

    compaction_state: CompactionState,
}

pub(crate) struct StoredCompactionState {
    id: u64,
    compaction_state: CompactionState,
    compaction_state_store: Arc<CompactionStateStore>,
}

pub(crate) struct FenceableCompactionState {
    compaction_state: StoredCompactionState,
    local_epoch: u64,
    stored_epoch: fn(&CompactionState) -> u64,
}
```

### Persisting Internal Compactions

1. Size_tiered_compaction compaction scheduler executes `maybe_schedule_compaction` and returns a list of compactions to be executed.

2. Compactor executes the `submit_compaction` method on the list of compactions from Step(1). the method delegates the validation of the compactions to the compactor_state.rs.

3. For each compaction in the input list of compactions, The compactor_state.rs executes its own `submit_compaction` method that would do the following validations against the compaction_state:

    - Check If the count of runnning compactions is less than the threshold. If yes, continue

    - Check if the source L0 SSTs and SRs are not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

    - Check if the destination SR is not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

>     - Check if creating new SR(as part of L0 compaction) would it form a tiered SR group and get compacted. If yes, do not create the SR.

Author: > not sure I follow this one - is this the backpressure check? 

Yes. 

> IMO this should be done by the compaction policy rather than the state since it depends on the way the compaction policy structures the LSM

I had to move it here since compactions triggered by external process would have already selected the source SSTs, source SRs and we would need to have this check in a common place. Hence, decided to move it from size_tiered_compaction to `compaction_state.submit_compaction()` since sources are already picked by the client.

>     - Check if creating new SR(as part of L0 compaction) would it form a tiered SR group and get compacted. If yes, do not create the SR.

Reviewer 2: Yep, sounds good

1. Client provides the list of source_ssts and source_srs to be compacted by calling the method `submit_manual_compaction`.

2. Use the `pick_next_compaction` to transform the request into a list of compactions.

3. For each compaction in the input list of compactions, The compactor_state.rs executes its own `submit_compaction` method that would do the following validations against the compaction_state:

    - Check If the count of runnning compactions is less than the threshold. If yes, continue

    - Check if the source L0 SSTs and SRs are not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

    - Check if the destination SR is not part of any other compaction. If yes, continue.

    - Check if creating new SR(as part of L0 compaction) would it form a tiered SR group and get compacted. If yes, do not create the SR.

    - Add compaction validations to verify correct group of sources and destinations are selected. Reference: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0002-compaction.md#compactions.

    - The existing validations in `submit_compaction` method.

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Author: > When does this check happen?

Before persisting the compactorState to the .compactor file.

> Does the compactor always validate all the compactions and drop invalid ones, even if it's accepted them previously?

Compactor only writes a .compactor file with valid compactions. Step(3) to Step(5) denote that flow. Once written to the .compactor file, a compaction is always valid.

Compactor would compare the persisted compactions with the current list of compactions(that need to be persisted). If there is a conflict, the compactions in the current list would be discarded.

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Reviewer 2: > Once written to the .compactor file, a compaction is always valid.

The compactor should be the final decider of what compactions run, so it needs some way to reject a compaction even if the CLI has added it to the list. This suggest we need some way to mark a compaction as requested so the compactor can make the decision about whether to accept it or not.

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Author: > The compactor should be the final decider of what compactions run, so it needs some way to reject a compaction even if the CLI has added it to the list. This suggest we need some way to mark a compaction as requested so the compactor can make the decision about whether to accept it or not.

I am not getting your concern. The proposed protocol makes this decision based on the validations.

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Author: > This is the client validating the request. The client process is the one that's running the validation code. If the client is on an old version, then the validation code is from that old version. 

Wouldn't this be an issue with any client facing feature? As mentioned was earlier, this was captured as a bug in other PR.

> I think it's still useful to have the client process run validation to get feedback to the user faster, but the compactor should be the final decider.

This could mean that client can never know whether CLI request was or not unless the compactionJob initiates its processing. I feel more inclined towards the proposed approach because its simpler and with https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/issues/779, I think this case might not break any flows.

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Reviewer 2: > Wouldn't this be an issue with any client facing feature? As mentioned was earlier, this was captured as a bug in other PR.

It's similar in the sense that they both involve client potentially making invalid mutations to the manifest/compactor state. This is somewhat different though since writing a compaction can be done in a way that doesn't break the data model (defined by the schema), but does break the semantic correctness of the compactor. So we could eventually fix #779 by allowing cross-version writes if the fb schema has not changed. But it's still possible for the validation logic to have changed, and its worth having a mechanism to deal with that in the protocol.

> This could mean that client can never know whether CLI request was or not unless the compactionJob initiates its processing

I don't see how this is fundamentally changed. The client still needs to poll the manifest to discover the status of the compaction. It's unlikely an operator would just request a compaction and then move on and not look at it again.

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Author: I got confused with the term "client-process" since SlateDB being an embedded Db would be linked to the "client-process". However, now I get what you folks are saying by not having validations on the client side. You mean to say that the compactor event loop daemon should be the authority to decide whether a compaction is valid or not and not the `submit_compaction_request()` function exposed via the admin API.

In the proposed protocol, I was using client process(as defined above) as a validation arbiter for the external process compaction requests. Hence, in the event loop, I was only validating the Compactions scheduled by the scheduler.

This would mean I have to change the following in the proposed protocol:
1. `submit_compaction_request()` need not validate( best effort) the compaction request.
2. During a compaction event loop iteration, it should validate both the compactions scheduled by the scheduler as well as the compactions in "submitted" state. The order of validation should be as follows:
      1. Compactions stored as "submitted" in the compaction_state
      2. Compactions scheduled by the scheduler

>   Note: Invalid compactions would be dropped from the list of compactions during validation.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. Feel free to resolve

 - Ensure the CLI requests are executed on the active Compactor process

### **Key Design Decisions**

#### **1. Persistence Boundaries**
**Decision**: Persist state at the critical boundary:
- **Output SST Completion**: Every ~256MB of written data (always persisted)

**Rationale**: Output SST completions provide the best recovery value per persistence operation. Each represents significant completed work that we don't want to lose.

#### **2. Enhanced Job Model**  
**Decision**: Change from 1:1 to 1:N relationship between Compaction and CompactionJob.

**Rationale**: Enables retry logic, progress tracking, and recovery without breaking existing compaction scheduling logic.

#### **3. State Management Pattern**
**Decision**: Mirror the existing `ManifestStore` pattern with `CompactorStore`.

**Rationale**: Reuses proven patterns for atomic updates, version checking, and conflict resolution that are already battle-tested in SlateDB.

#### **4. Recovery Strategy**
- Resume from last completed output SST

The section below is under discussion here: https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/pull/695/files#r2239561471

#### **5. Migrate `compaction_epoch` from Manifest to CompactionState**

> **Decision**: Deprecate `compaction_epoch` from Manifest.

Author: Yes. Updated the RFC.

#### On startup...

1. Compactor fetches the latest .manifest file (00005.manifest).

2. Compactor fetches the latest .compactor file (00005.compactor). 

3. Manifest increments `compactor_epoch` and Try writing the  `compaction_epoch` to the .manifest file (00006.manifest)

    File version check (in-memory and remote object store): if 00006.manifest exists, 

      - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch > current compactor epoch, die (fenced)

>       - If latest .manifest compactor_epoch == current compactor epoch, panic

Author: Updated
